+++
Description = 'brian d foy on Benchmarking'
Date = 2007-04-08T01:01:01+01:00
PublishDate = 2007-04-08T01:01:01+01:00
podcast_file = "https://archive.org/download/Perlcast/Perlcast_Presentation_002.mp3"
podcast_duration = ""
#podcast_bytes = "" # the length of the episode in bytes
episode_image = "img/guest/brian_d_foy.jpg"
#episode_banner = ""
guests = ['brian_d_foy'] # The names of your guests, based on the filename without extension.
#sponsors = []
#episode = ""
title = 'brian d foy on Benchmarking'
#images = ["img/episode/may.jpg"]
hosts = ['jmcadams'] 
#aliases = ["/##"]
#youtube = ""
explicit = "no" # values are "yes" or "no"
# media_override # if you want to use a specific URL for the audio file
# truncate = ""
+++
Perlcast is back with a recording of a presentation conducted by brian d foy at a Los Angeles Perl Mongers meeting. The talk focuses on benchmarking your code and covers topics that brian included in his soon-to-be released book, "Mastering Perl". "Mastering Perl" is a text on creating professional programs with Perl. It can be pre-ordered now at most of the major book distributors, so go check it out at your vendor of choice.

Many of you know that brian is a partner at Stonehenge Consulting, Perlcast's primary sponsor. Recently Stonehenge kicked it up a notch and provided Perlcast with a Rock Star Grant to attend, speak at, and record interviews during the Nordic Perl Workshop 2007. I'm excited to be given the opportunity to visit Denmark an meet some of the excellent Perl hackers on the other side of the planet. I'd like to thank Stonehenge and the hosts of the Nordic Perl Workshop for all of their support and hope to meet many of you in Denmark at the workshop to be held April 28th and 29th, 2007.

This presentation is a pretty long one, but I encourage you to take the time to listen to the talk. brian is a great speaker and has some smart opinions and advice on benchmarking your code. Also, if your Perl Mongers group has the ability to record presentations, feel free to submit them to Perlcast for distribution. Just send an email to me at perlcast-at-gmail.com and we can iron out the details.


Presentation Audio

Perl Mongers

Mastering Perl

Nordic Perl Workshop